---
title: PHP 7.4 preloading benchmark
author: Tobias Nyholm
date: '2020-01-11 21:43:00 +0200'
header:
  image: "images/posts/preloading.png"
  teaser: images/posts/preloading.png
categories:
- PHP
- Symfony
---

Preloading arrived to PHP 7.4.0 in November 2019. I was super excited about this 
and I started to try it out. But I quickly noticed that it was a little buggy when
you started with a "real world" application. It worked fine for small hello world 
apps. 

One example of such issues are with ``class_alias``, which is a common practise to 
use by libraries that want to provide backwards or forwards compatibility. If you 
were trying to preload a file like that, then PHP-FPM failed to start with output
``zend_mm_heap corrupted``. 

PHP 7.4.2 fixed these issues and preloading can finally be used. Unless you are 
running Windows... Preloading in Windows has been disabled in PHP 7.4.2. PHP 7.4.2 
will be released the 23rd of January 2020, but the release candidate 1 is available
now. 

Since preloading hasn't been stable on a language level until now, there are very 
little support from the large frameworks. Symfony has done a proof of concept of 
how it can be used. It was released in Symfony 4.4 and 5.0. 

I downloaded and installed the PHP 7.4.2RC1 and tried it out in two applications.
One small application and one large. 


## The applications

| Application   | src files | src lines | vendor files | vendor lines |
| ------------- | --------- | --------- | ------------ | ------------ |
| Small         | 150       | 5.300     | 7.100        | 375.000 |
| Large         | 2.500     | 107.000   | 11.200       | 857.000 |

There are quite a big difference in the size of the applications. Both are running
Symfony 4.4.  

## Profiling the small application

### Sampling data

So I started by running a baseline by refreshing the page every 5 seconds. 
When I had enough data I redeployed the application with adding the following
line to php.ini

{% highlight ini %}
opcache.preload=/var/task/var/cache/prod/srcApp_KernelProdContainer.preload.php

{% endhighlight %}

Then I started to refresh the page again to sample data a second time. 

### The data

The data I got from the production environment looks like this: 

| Type            | Average response time | Samples | 
| --------------- | --------------------- | ------- | 
| Baseline        | 16,16 ms  | 119  | 
| With preloading | 15,21 ms  | 123  | 
| Difference      | -5.9%     |      | 

This did not look very awesome at all. I was confused at this point. Sure I have a 
very thin and fast application it may be an edge case. I started profiling my 
application with Blackfire to see what was going on.

I could see that I spent less time with ``spl_autoload_call`` also the call count 
was down from 416 to 279. Memory was also down a few megabytes. When profiling, the 
response time went from 41,9 ms to 36,2 ms. That is down 14%. 

| Type            | Average response time | ``spl_autoload_call`` | Memory |
| --------------- | --------------------- | --------------------- | ------ | 
| Baseline        | 41,9 ms  | 416   | 3,70 MB 
| With preloading | 36,2 ms  | 279   | 2.96 MB
| Difference      | -14%     | -33%  | -20%

## Profiling the large application

I profiled the large application on localhost. I saw the same trend there. The application's
response time went from 267 ms to 258 ms (-3.3%). I was using a few megabytes less 
memory. 

| Type            | Average response time | ``spl_autoload_call`` | Memory |
| --------------- | --------------------- | --------------------- | ------ | 
| Baseline        | 267 ms  | 496   | 11,30 MB 
| With preloading | 258 ms  | 407   | 8,67 MB
| Difference      | -3,3%   | -18%  | -23%

Instead of using Symfony's strategy to preload, I decided to preload all classes
in my src folder as addition to Symfony's strategy to load all services. That 
ended up being a bit worse than before but better than the baseline.

| Type            | Average response time | ``spl_autoload_call`` | Memory |
| --------------- | --------------------- | --------------------- | ------ | 
| Baseline        | 267 ms  | 496   | 11,30 MB 
| With preloading | 258 ms  | 407   | 8,67 MB
| src + services  | 264 ms  | 304   | 8,19 MB

## Profiling hello world

I decided to profile everybody's favorite example. A fresh install of Symfony 4.4
with just one controller that returns an empty response. 

| Type            | Average response time | ``spl_autoload_call`` | Memory |
| --------------- | --------------------- | --------------------- | ------ | 
| Baseline        | 6,30 ms  | 29   | 527 kB
| With preloading | 5.72 ms  | 20   | 318 kB
| Difference      | -9,1%    | -31% | -40%


## Why these results?

I've seen blog posts that says it will be [13% faster when preload hot classes](https://github.com/composer/composer/issues/7777#issuecomment-440268416). 
How come we dont see these results in my tests?

I tried profiling the large application again, but this time without Blackfire's 
aggregation enabled. Ie, I was just running the profiler on one page load instead
of not normal 10. I wanted to see if preloading made a difference with an empty
opcache. And yes, it did. 

| Type            | Wall time | I/O time | CPU time | Memory  |
| --------------- | --------- | -------- | -------- | --------|
| Baseline        | 1.500 ms  | 444 ms   | 1060 ms  | 26,1 MB |
| With preloading | 597 ms    | 38,8ms   | 566 ms   | 17,7 MB |
| Difference      | -60%      | -93%     | -46%     | -32%    |

My guess is that opcache could effectively cache most opcodes in my applications.
So consecutive runs had a warm opcache which is almost as good as preloading. It 
will just knock of a few milliseconds. 
 
I also assume that having all warm opcodes like in my tests is a privilege I have
as single user on localhost. In production there will be more different page loads
and opcache will not be able to keep every class in memory for all requests.  

## The future of preloading

I believe preloading is a great feature and its potential will grow beyond what we
know today. I'm excited to see what tooling that will be developed around it. But
preloading is something that is very application specific. To "preload everything"
is not a good strategy. As my reasonable small testing shows, even "preload everything 
in src" is not a good strategy. 

To efficiently come up with the best preloading script you need to make analysis on
your applications normal (or important) behavior. I would like third party libraries
decide that for me. That is why I dont see future where Composer is helping me with 
preloading. Composer does autoloading and it does it very well. Preloading is for the 
application authors. 